*Epistemic status: model-building based on observation, with a few successful unusual predictions. Anecdotal evidence has so far been consistent with the model. This puts it at risk of seeming more compelling than the evidence justifies just yet. Caveat emptor.* * * * Imagine you're a very young child. Around, say, three years old. You've just done something that really upsets your mother. Maybe you were playing and knocked her glasses off the table and they broke. Of course you find her reaction uncomfortable. Maybe scary. You're too young to have detailed metacognitive thoughts, but if you could reflect on why you're scared, you wouldn't be confused: you're scared of how she'll react. She tells you to say you're sorry. You utter the magic words, hoping that will placate her. And she narrows her eyes in suspicion. "You sure don't *look* sorry. Say it *and mean it*." Now you have a serious problem. You don't have an internal "actually mean it" button. And yet here's Mom peering into your soul and demanding that you both have that button and press it. Trying to appease her didn't work. She needs you to *be different* — and she's *checking*. What can you do now? This is a template for what I've come to call "the hostile telepaths problem". I think it's a common feature of social problems. The hostile telepaths problem is when you're dealing with a being (a) who can kind of read your internal experiences and (b) whom you don't trust won't make your situation worse due to what they find in you. There are lots of solutions to the hostile telepaths problem. I don't claim to know all of them. But recognizing some common ones has helped clarify a *lot* of my thinking — particularly around self-deception and akrasia. And getting very clear on the nature of the problem makes identifying real solutions *way* easier. This fact produces some previously-surprising-to-me predictions, especially for trauma processing and for making emotionally difficult decisions. I'll try to spell out what I mean with some theory and a few examples. Newcomblike self-deception ========================== There's one really tricky solution to the hostile telepaths problem. It deserves some special front-loaded attention before I name some other solutions. Here I'll try to spell out its logic with a modification of [Newcomb's Problem](https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/newcomb-s-problem). Suppose that instead of Omega, you're dealing with Omega-V. Omega-V is an extremely good *but imperfect* predictor of someone's box choice. Through some clever sleuthing, you deduce why. Omega-V is scanning only folks' *visual thinking* for a little while prior to their box choice. It's extremely good at tracking the difference between the mental visualizations of one-boxers vs. two-boxers… *provided they don't know Omega-V is scanning specifically their visual thinking*. So now you have an edge. Maybe you can trick Omega-V. Maybe you can visually think like a one-boxer and use other modes of reasoning (like inner talk) to plan on actually two-boxing. You just have to be very careful to have any "leaks" of reasoning into visualization look totally normal for a one-boxer. If you decide it's worth the risk to try for this deception, the visual reasoning part of your mind has to be kind of siloed from the rest. It's like you have a subagent that truly honestly believes you're a one-boxer. It's the *non*-visual reasoning parts of you that are aware of the real plan. Another way of saying this is: in normal Newcomb's Problem, you can't tell whether you're in the real world being faced with Omega's offer or if you're instead Omega's *simulation* of real-you and you're revealing what real-you *will* do. The situation is similar with Omega-V, but in this case it's specifically your visual reasoner (viewed as kind of a subagent) that has to be built in such a way that it can't tell whether it's a simulation. Many other parts of you can tell perfectly well what's going on![^ca6dbku7f9] But for the deception to work, the way in which you plan on two-boxing cannot be something your inner visual reasoner can even *deduce*. Now, let's take this one step further. Let's suppose we're instead dealing with Omega-C. Also an imperfect predictor. But this time you learn that Omega-C scans specifically all of — and only — your *conscious* thinking. At this point, the right strategy is to consciously decide you're going to one-box. But some people still find themselves two-boxing *and winning*. Even while consciously intending to one-box. Sometimes they get confused and say the wrong thing or push the wrong button. Some of them trip and accidentally grab both boxes. Some laugh and grab both boxes and find them both full. Assuming that at least *some* of those outcomes are strategic… how? Hint: now *you* (by which I mean conscious parts of you) are maybe the siloed part. Basically an illusion meant to trick Omega-C. The thing is, you cannot tell. Because if you could, then the deception — if it were there — wouldn't work. Which is to say: on the inside, you cannot tell the difference between running this Omega-C deception strategy and honestly truly just being a one-boxer. And furthermore, it's actually to your advantage *not to check*. Even if you were to find some way of being able to tell the difference! But because of that, if you're aware of this deception strategy, it might work best if you honestly (from your perspective) look for some way to tell if you're running it. Actively trying to "come clean". That's a pretty powerful signal to Omega-C that you really are a one-boxer. So if you can make it so that it seems to you like you really are looking, including accounting for awareness of possible non-conscious "shadow" reasoning, and you find none, but you still two-box in the end… …well, you win! …while the conscious parts of you are confused and surprised. And possibly quite dismayed. Sketch of a real-world version ------------------------------ I call this pattern "Newcomblike self-deception" as a nod to Nate Soares' point that [Newcomblike problems are the norm](https://mindingourway.com/newcomblike-problems-are-the-norm/). The deal is that people are kind of telepathic, in the sense of using things like vocal tone and body language and microexpressions and so on to intuitively deduce what might otherwise be hidden in others. They're scanning for things like intent and strategy and emotional tone. Often this telepathy is in service of synching up ("Hey, you seem upset, is something wrong?"), but it doubles as threat detection. This telepathy is imperfect. Which means that sometimes Newcomblike self-deception is in fact a viable strategy. I'd like to name one way I think this type of self-deception can actually happen in a person. It might be the main way it happens, or it might be rare. I honestly don't know. But it's one I've in fact seen in myself[^2eop672s6g3] and I think I've observed in some others. By some mysterious method, it's possible to contract your awareness — by which I mean, the space of things you're actually aware of can be smaller than the space of sensory inputs (including mental experiences like thoughts and memories). Lots of people experience this when watching TV (losing awareness of the room), or when deep in flow work (not noticing hunger for hours while programming). If you construct a sort of fake self in your mind, and then contract your awareness around that fake self, it can seem to you on the inside like you *really are* the way depicted in the fake self. Like it's not fake, it really is who you are. If you also build up explanations *to your fictitious self* about why things outside that fiction either are consistent with it or don't matter, then you both (a) can honestly display to hostile telepaths that you (here meaning fake you) are being fully sincere in not hiding anything and (b) possibly give *the telepaths* ways of discounting the unavoidable signals that you (here meaning you holistically) are hiding something. For instance, as a child whose mother says to you "Say you're sorry *and mean it*", you might be able to strategically misinterpret your fear of Mom's Wrath as "being really sorry". As long as you're not aware that that's what you're doing, it might work very well! She might read your distress as you really meaning it. ("I'm sorry I'm sorry I won't do it again please Mom I'm sorry…!") And you can keep yourself from being aware of this whole strategy by keeping your awareness contracted on the fictitious version of yourself that's "bad" and "very sorry", and keeping your understanding of the real problem outside of your awareness. Possible examples in real life ------------------------------ Here are some examples I think I've actually seen — in culture, in others, and in myself: * I think the thing with kids that I sketched above really does happen. More generally, I think similar applications of Newcomblike self-deception are the root cause of (a certain very common kind of) shame: it's a strategic mislabeling of one's pain as being about one's "flaws". * Relatedly, lots of folk mislabel their experience as "I hate math." Most people I've talked to who say this actually hate the coercion and gaslighting used almost universally in math classes. The real problems most folk are focused on in math class are *social*, like "Appease the teacher" and "Get Mom & Dad off my back." But teachers and parents might insist to a student that "you need to try harder" with the math itself while seeming to sort of telepathically scan them for whether they are in fact trying. I think this can sometimes lead students to strategically mislabel their distress about the situation *to themselves*. * Gurus getting involved in sex scandals. I'm sure that at least *some* of them have been very sincere about what amounts to real Jungian shadow work. But somehow all that sincerity mysteriously ends up hiding and serving (instead of revealing and dealing with) an underlying drive to just get laid. * Likewise people "accidentally" cheating. Sometimes folk really are just surprising-to-them vulnerable in some situation and don't have the right kind of discipline when they turn out to need it. But the fact that that *ever* happens can act as a cover. It's especially obvious in cases of *repeated* "accidental" cheating. * I've seen four friends, as mothers, stay with *and defend* abusive partners (boyfriends or husbands) for *years*. She'd often insist that he's just stressed, or it's a frequent misunderstanding but they love each other, etc. In three cases it became possible for her to consider that he might be abusive after a change in her work gave her enough money to support herself and her child without him if need be. In the fourth case, the mother got a lot of social support such as a place to live and people she trusted to take care of her and her child, and *then* she had room to consider her partner's actions as abusive. * If I'm upset with a friend and I'm worried that they can't handle what I'm upset with them about, sometimes I can't think straight about what my problem with them is while I'm talking to them. My mind gets foggy, my concepts seem mushy even to me, the words I remember from journaling about it before now form what feels like a gibberish argument, etc. Often this fog suddenly clears up if I get a vivid sense from my friend that our friendship will be fine after we talk. It also gets clearer if the issue is so big that I realize I'm fine with them not being in my life after we talk. * Badly wanting someone to like you can make them like you less. So how do you get them to like you? Not by being aware that you're asking that question! But maybe if you do things for them without knowing that's why you're doing them…? ("Oh, I forgot Bob likes

[truncated at 2000 words]
