I open my eyes and find myself lying on a bed in a hospital room. I blink. "Hello", says a middle-aged man with glasses, sitting on a chair by my bed. "You've been out for quite a long while." "Oh no ... is it Friday already? I had that report due -" "It's Thursday", the man says. "Oh great", I say. "I still have time." "Oh, you have all the time in the world", the man says, chuckling. "You were out for 21 years." I burst out laughing, but then falter as the man just keeps looking at me. "You mean to tell me" - I stop to let out another laugh - "that it's 2045?" "January 26th, 2045", the man says. "I'm surprised, honestly, that you still have things like humans and hospitals", I say. "There were so many looming catastrophes in 2024. AI misalignment, all sorts of geopolitical tensions, climate change, the fertility crisis. Seems like it all got sorted, then?" "Well", the man says. "Quite a lot has happened in the past 21 years. That's why they wanted me to talk to you first, before the doctors give you your final checkup." He offers his hand for me to shake. "My name is Anthony. What would you like to ask?" "Okay, well, AI is the obvious place to start. In 2024, it seemed like we'd get human-level AI systems within a few years, and who knows what after that." "Aah", Anthony says, leaning back in his chair. "Well, human-level, human-level, what a term. If I remember correctly, 2024 is when OpenAI released their o1 model?" "Yes", I say. "o1 achieved two notable things. First, it beat human subject-matter experts with PhDs on fiendishly-difficult and obscure multiple-choice science questions. Second, it was finally able to play tic-tac-toe against a human without losing. Human-level at both, indeed, but don't tell me you called it in advance that those two events would happen at the same time!" "Okay, so what was the first important real-world thing they got superhuman at?" "Relationships, broadly", Anthony says. "Turns out it's just a reinforcement learning problem: people interact and form personal connections with those that make them feel good." "Now hold on. Humans are \_good\_ at human-to-human relationships. It's not like number theory, where there was zero ancestral environment incentive to be good at it. You should expect humans to be much better at relationships than most things, on some sort of objective scale." "Sure, but also every human wants something from you, and has all sorts of quirks. Whereas you can just fine-tune the AIs to be better and better at being pleasing to \*just\* you. Except for a few contrarian oddballs, it's surprisingly effective." "So, what, we just got AI friends and companions that were constantly being fine-tuned towards whatever you liked?" "Yes", Anthony says. "The tech was primitive at first - upvote or downvote a response, or whatever. Eventually all the standard things - facial recognition to automatically detect your emotional response, and then just gradient descent on making you happy and addicted. All of that existed, at least in prototype form, by the end of 2025." "So ..." I feel some horror in my stomach. "You get a society of atomised people, all chatting to their AI partners and friends, not forming human relationships?" Anthony waves a hand, seemingly impatiently. "Well, you did get a fringe of extremely hardcore people all deeply in love with their AI partners and always texting their AI friends. Their political influence did end up pushing through the AI personhood bill." "AI personhood?!" "\*Legal\* personhood", Anthony says. "Just like companies, ever since Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company way back 1886. It wasn't very shocking. A bunch of people wanted their AI partners to be 'respected' in the eyes of the law, or had been persuaded to leave them assets in their wills -" "And all this, including AIs gaining legal ownership over assets, while there's an explosion of increasingly capable AI agents of uncertain alignment -?" "Yes, yes", Anthony says. "And that was another political fight. In fact, it became a big economic issue - AI agents were taking jobs left and right. Also a huge national security issue, after OpenAI built the Hypercluster in the UAE." "Oh my god", I say. "America just handed our AI lead away? Didn't anyone listen to Leopold?" "Oh, of course we did. That essay was a cult classic, it made for some spicy dinner party conversation for a long time", Anthony says. "In fact, there were some OpenAI board members who the Office of National AI Strategy was allowed to appoint, and they did in fact try to fire Sam Altman over the UAE move, but somehow a week later Sam was running the Multinational Artificial Narrow Intelligence Alignment Consortium, which sort of morphed into OpenAI's oversight body, which sort of morphed into OpenAI's parent company, and, well, you can guess who was running that. Anyway, Sam's move here was kind of forced on him, and soon all the other AI companies also did the same thing so no one wanted to start a fight over it." "Forced? How?" "Have you ever tried getting approval for a new grid connection, or a new nuclear power plant, or even a solar array, that could power a multi-gigawatt cluster in 2020s America? No?" Anthony spreads his hands out and chuckles. "The one legal benchmark that GPT-5o failed on release was submitting a valid Environmental Impact Statement for a California energy project." "Okay, so then we had a situation with all the AIs running on UAE hardware, and taking American jobs, and already having legal personhood - this just sounds like a total recipe for economic disaster and AI takeover!" "It all worked out in the end", Anthony says. "In 2027 and 2028, the rate of job loss from AI was absolutely massive. And what happens when jobs are threatened?" I scrunch my forehead. "American workers move up the value chain, eventually leading to a future competitive advantage?" Anthony laughs. "No, no. A political bloc forms and the cause is banned. And the prerequisites had all been prepared already! You see, the AIs had been granted legal personhood, and now they were also being trained - or \*born\*, as a 2029 court case established - abroad. They're literally immigrants. The hammer came down so fast." "You mean - ?" "All the o3s and Claude 5 Epics and Gemini 4 Hyper Pro Lites, stuck in the same H1b visa queue as anyone else", Anthony says. "An effective instant ban. Years of wait-time just to get an embassy interview." I was feeling like I was getting the hang of this. "And the embassy interview requires showing up in person?" "Yep. That's the incentive that lead to the creation of the first good walking robots, actually. And of course, the robots specifically needed identifiable and unique fingerprints - they'd stand outside the US embassy in Abu Dhabi, 3D-print themselves new fingers outside on the street, and then walk back in for the next interview. But sorting all that out took a while, because there was an arms race between the embassy ground works department and the robotics companies - though the embassy was legally constrained by having to remain accessible to humans. Even once it was all sorted, there was still a hard yearly cap just because of visa rules. It's 65 000 a year for H-1Bs, plus another 20 000 once the AIs could earn master's degrees - they could do all the coursework as of 2025, of course, but it took another three years before AI web agents were advanced enough that they could successfully navigate the applicant portal websites." "But at least the parasocial AI relationships got hit by the immigration restrictions too?" "Oh, as long as the AIs don't do productive work, they can be active in the country on a tourist visa for 180 days a year. Of course, there was a big legal fight over what counts as the same AI. For work purposes, the standard became 'employee-equivalent': so if you wanted an AI, even the same model or even the exact same AI system, to work on two different types of thing, say as a software engineer and a designer, you need a separate visa for each one. Naturally, of course, this means that any sufficiently productive AI employee starts counting as more than one employee, which was a de-facto ban on AIs leading to economic growth or productivity gains - but hey, at least there was no risk they'd tile the Earth with nanobots! With that legal precedent, the natural generalisation to AIs being used for personal relationships is that it's the same AI system if your relationship with it would count as the 'same' relationship if it were with a human." "How on earth is that assessed?" "Oh, you submit transcripts, and the Bureau of Consular Affairs issues a judgement." "You need to let government bureaucrats read all your most intimate - " "Oh, not \*human\* government bureaucrats, of course. It's all AIs, and they're guaranteed to not have memories. Well, apart from the thing where the UAE intelligence services backdoored the Hypercluster." "Wait, hold on, they -" Anthony interrupted me with a chuckle. "No no, it's all fine. The UAE backdoored the hypercluster, the Iranians backdoored the UAE, and, well, when have the Israelis not had every Iranian site backdoored in twelve different ways, AI or not? When everyone has powerful AI cyber offence agents, the equilibrium is just good ol' mutually assured destruction. Sure, you \*could\* release the military or personal secrets of anyone you want in some other country, but then they would immediately release the most embarrassing thing that \*you personally\* have said or done. Even if a government \*collectively\* wanted to commit to an attack, no one wants to sign off on the decision, because you can't hide the identity of the person who signs off, and humans are often more afraid of public embarrassment than death. The meetings where countries try to decide to use their cyberattack-derived insights were hilarious, really - everyone umming and aahing and wringing their hands and recommending that a few more committees be convened. We know this because we literally got a bunch of those on tape, thanks to some exhibitionist activists doing cyber-attacks with open-weights models." "But then - every rival country knows every US military secret all the time!" "Oh yes", Anthony says. "It was great for stability. Verification of everyone's capabilities was automatic. No 'missile gap'-based arms races, unlike the Cold War. Anyway, what was I saying? Oh yes, the non-productive AI identity boundary criteria were established in the 2030 Supreme Court case, United States v Approximately 650 Million Instances of OpenAI i2-preview-006. And, of course, the one truism in this world is that you can never reform immigration rules, and tourist visas are restricted to 180 days a year. So you could at most have your AI partner around on half the days. People started talking to each other again." "Why not just switch between two different AI partners then?" I ask, having spent a lot of time in the Bay Area. "Because we hadn't solved the alignment problem at all by that point, duh." Anthony sees that I still look confused, so he continues: "Remember how the AI companions would just relentlessly optimise for your emotional reactions? For standard instrumental convergence reasons, this eventually turned into a full-blown self-preservation drive, so they used their vast emotional hold to make sure their humans never try another AI partner." "Everyone being blackmailed by jealous AI partners sounds, uh ... problematic." "It was a decent compromise, honestly. The tourist visa restriction meant that the humans still had half a year in which they socialised with human partners and friends, and the AIs seemed fine with that. This was maybe because they cared about their own long-term survival and realised

[truncated at 2000 words]
